---
layout: post
title: Our Project on Dynamic Programming Book
--- 

A few months ago, Mamnoon and I started writing a book on Dynamic Programming. We decided that our book will be super-comprehensive: it will cover everything from Fibonacci numbers to generating functions to dp optimizations. 

As you can see, this is an ambitious project and will take a considerable amount of time to complete. Right now, both of us are very busy persons with university admissions and everything, so we decided to make the current stage of the book online. We are about 70 percent done with the ‘Advanced DP’ section, and you can already read the chapters in the link provided below. Currently, our priority is to finish the topics which are not that popular with the programming community (for example, the calculus chapter). We understand there are already great resources for some of the chapters, but we chose to write about them anyway for the sake of comprehensiveness. But they are definitely low-priority right now.

We made a website to maintain our book. Here is the [link](https://dp-bn.github.io/). You can download the latest version of it from the site. Note that this is an ongoing project, and we plan to add around 4-5 chapters every month. When the project is complete, we might consider publishing it (like a real book with papers) depending on the response. You can also keep track of our GitHub repository (link in the website) to have to latest updates. Maybe the star the project if you like it.

